Standalone Helm guides (#925)
agentgateway/website: assets/agw-docs/standalone/helm-standalone-ui.md

Agentgateway serves the UI in two places:

- The admin interface on the agentgateway Deployment. You can access the admin UI by port-forwarding the deployment on port `15000` and accessing the `/ui` path.
- A gateway listener that you configure in the `ui` and `gateway` config sections. By default, you have a `default` gateway that serves both the UI and APIs on the same LoadBalancer port `80` as proxy traffic.

> [!WARNING]
> The `ui` section attaches to a gateway named `default` when you omit `ui.gateways`. Because the chart's default values include an empty `ui` section, a `default` gateway, and a `LoadBalancer` Service on port `80`, a default installation serves the UI and its APIs, including `/api/config`, on the same address as your proxy traffic. Complete this guide, or set `gateway.service.type` to `ClusterIP`, before you install the chart on a cluster that assigns external addresses.

## Before you begin

1. [Install the standalone Helm chart]({{< link-hextra path="/deployment/helm/install/" >}}).

> 2. Set up an identity provider (IdP), such as Keycloak or Microsoft Entra ID. Consider creating a client specifically for the UI, such as `agentgateway-ui`. For provider-specific setup, see the [identity provider integrations]({{< link-hextra path="/integrations/auth/" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Set up an identity provider (IdP), such as Keycloak or Microsoft Entra ID. Consider creating a client specifically for the UI, such as `agentgateway-ui`. For provider-specific setup instructions, see the [identity provider integrations]({{< link-hextra path="/integrations/auth/" >}}).
```

3. Confirm that the UI no longer answers on the proxy port.

   1. Port-forward the agentgateway Deployment on port 4000 for proxy traffic.

      ```sh
      kubectl port-forward -n {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}} \
        deploy/{{< reuse "agw-docs/standalone/helm-standalone-release.md" >}} 4000:4000
      ```

   2. Send a request to the `/ui` path. Confirm that the request fails, because port `4000` now serves only your routes.

      ```sh
      curl -s -o /dev/null -w "%{http_code}\n" http://localhost:4000/ui
      ```

      Example output:

      ```txt
      503
      ```

4. Confirm that the UI answers on its own port.

   1. Port-forward the agentgateway Deployment on port 4001 for UI traffic.

      ```sh
      kubectl port-forward -n {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}} \
        deploy/{{< reuse "agw-docs/standalone/helm-standalone-release.md" >}} 4001:4001
      ```

   2. Send a request to the `/ui` path. Confirm that the request returns a `200` success code.

      ```sh
      curl -s -o /dev/null -w "%{http_code}\n" http://localhost:4001/ui
      ```

      Example output:

      ```txt
      200
      ```

## Secure the UI with OIDC

> Add an authentication policy before you expose the UI port. The `ui.policies` section takes the same policies that a route takes, so you can use [OIDC]({{< link-hextra path="/configuration/security/oidc/" >}}) for browser logins, or [JWT]({{< link-hextra path="/configuration/security/jwt-authn/" >}}), [basic]({{< link-hextra path="/configuration/security/basic-authn/" >}}), or [API key]({{< link-hextra path="/configuration/security/apikey-authn/" >}}) authentication for programmatic access. To restrict which authenticated users get in, add an [authorization policy]({{< link-hextra path="/configuration/security/http-authz/" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add an authentication policy before you publicly expose the UI. The `ui.policies` section in the agentgateway config takes the same policies that a route takes, so you can use [OIDC]({{< link-hextra path="/configuration/security/oidc/" >}}) for browser logins, or [JWT]({{< link-hextra path="/configuration/security/jwt-authn/" >}}), [basic]({{< link-hextra path="/configuration/security/basic-authn/" >}}), or [API key]({{< link-hextra path="/configuration/security/apikey-authn/" >}}) authentication for programmatic access. To restrict which authenticated users get in, add an [authorization policy]({{< link-hextra path="/configuration/security/http-authz/" >}}) alongside the authentication policy.
```

1. Save the details of the UI client that you created in your IdP as environment variables. The redirect URI must match the address that you expose the UI on in a later step, and it must be registered as a valid redirect URI in your IdP.

   ```sh
   export ISSUER_URL=https://keycloak.example.com/realms/agentgateway
   export UI_CLIENT_ID=agentgateway-ui
   export UI_CLIENT_SECRET=<client-secret>
   export REDIRECT_URI=https://agentgateway.example.com/oauth/callback
   ```

> 2. Create a Secret that holds the session cookie encryption key. Agentgateway refuses to start when an `oidc` policy is set and this key is missing.

Reviewer: is the session cookie encryption key a random key? what is it used for? I am assuming it needs to have the `OIDC_COOKIE_SECRET` name in the secret, right?

Reviewer: does the secret need to be named like this? I am just wondering why this needes to be separate from the secret in the next step or can it be all in one

   ```

   Example output:

   ```txt
   location: https://keycloak.example.com/realms/agentgateway/protocol/openid-connect/auth?response_type=code&client_id=agentgateway-ui&...
   ```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Agentgateway fetches the OIDC discovery document at startup, so the issuer must be reachable from the pod. When the fetch fails, the pod does not start, and the logs report `failed to decode oidc discovery response from uri`. If the pod enters `CrashLoopBackOff` after you add the policy, check the issuer URL and any egress restrictions.

## Expose the UI

Now that the UI requires a login, terminate TLS on the admin gateway and expose it on its own LoadBalancer Service.

Agentgateway reads the certificate and key from the file system, so you mount them into the pod from a Kubernetes Secret. Because the UI usually needs different exposure than proxy traffic, give it a separate Service instead of adding the port to the main Service.

1. Create a TLS Secret from the certificate and key for your UI hostname.

   ```sh
   kubectl create secret tls agentgateway-ui-tls \
     -n {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}} \

>      --cert=ui-cert.pem --key=ui-key.pem

Reviewer: where are the cert and key coming from? are we assuming they have that?

Author: yes, it is assumed that you have this, typically from your DNS provider, at least that's where I got my certs from

   ```

> 2. Mount the Secret, add the `tls` settings to the admin gateway, and add a separate Service for the UI. The chart names the extra Service `<release name>-<name>`, such as `{{< reuse "agw-docs/standalone/helm-standalone-release.md" >}}-ui`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Mount the TLS Secret as a volume and configure the admin gateway to terminate TLS traffic on the gateway by using the certs from that Secret. You also expose the UI with a separate Service so that the UI and proxy traffic do not share the same service address. The chart names the extra Service `<release name>-<name>`, such as `{{< reuse "agw-docs/standalone/helm-standalone-release.md" >}}-ui`.
```
